This is an interview with Louis Antoine Truart.
The date is the 20th of April, 1985. How old were you
during the years 1940 to 1945? Fourteen.
Where were you in the years 1940-1945? In Nice,
France. How long after France fell to the Nazis in
1940 was it before you became involved in the
resistance? Well, quite a few years, because we
moved from Lyon, where we used to live, down to
Lourdes, which is on the border of Spain and
France. And then at that time, I was just nine years
old, and they flipped the coin between my mother
and her friend, if we should stay in France or go to
Spain. and the coin came down and we stayed in
France. So we stayed in France. We stayed in
Lourdes for quite a while, because France was
divided. The northern part was occupied by the
Germans, southern part was still free. The
Italians were supposed to take over, but they
didn't. And then we moved from Lourdes to
Marseille, and then from Marseille to Nice. So you
ended up in Nice in what year? We ended up in this in
1943. Is that when you became involved with the
resistance? Right after 1944, yeah. What part of
the resistance were you in? What did you do?
Sabotage. Okay, great. Did your role change or did
you stay in sabotage the whole time? I stayed in
sabotage and stealing weapons. Do you know who the
head of your area of resistance was? By code name
Manley. Did you ever find out who it really was?
After the war, yes. After the war. What was the code
name and who was the person? Beer Man. Beer Man?
Yeah. And who was, what was his real name? What was
the question? What was his real name? Oh, I forget.
That's 40 years ago. I don't remember. That's
okay. He was a sales representative for the beer
distributor in that area of Nice. And we sell beer
to the German and got friendly with them and talk,
you know, and get information from them, that's
all. But his code name was the Beer Man. But you
didn't know who he really was until after the war?
No, until after the war, yeah. Okay, great. Did you
ever talk to your family about what you did or what
they did, or did you see things that they did? Well,
very likely because The way things were going, you
know, you didn't know who your friends were, even
in your family. And a lot of time in some of the
family, some of the parents or kids turn against
each other. And so we talked very little bit,
although we knew what we were doing. We knew what my
mother was doing, trying to get those Jew to escape
from France to Spain, back to England. But that's
about the extent of it. Very, very little bit. The
less you knew and the better off you were. Just do
your job and that was all. So your mother
participated in the resistance too? Very
strongly, yes. And what did she do? Some
transportation? Did she do any intelligence? She
was mainly information, gathering information
from the German...
I don't know what you call them, the German that...
supply ammunition to the front line. They have a
special name, and I forget what it is now in German,
but whatever. She was trying to make them talk, be
very friendly with them so that we knew their move,
so we could go ahead and get in the middle of it and
stop them. Did you ever help her with these
conversations, try to get it out of them? No, she
just did her own, you know, and she... We invited a
German officer. They were real nice. We had a
lieutenant. He was a German-Russian. His name was
Lupankov. P-A-N-K-O-V is his name. A Russian, but
a white Russian. And he was very mean, but he was
very talkative, you know. I mean, we invited him. I
mean, my mother invited him. feed him and give him
wine and beer, kind of trying to mix things up so he
could turn information loose, you know, and then
say, hey, why don't you come up next Friday, you
know, and we'll have a barbecue party or something
like that. And he said, well, no, I can't because
I'd have to be out of town. And I said, oh, come on,
you can get somebody else to do it. He said, no, we
have to take a whole triangle of ammunition in such
and such place. And that's all we needed. So we
turned that to the underground and blew the train
up. So we were pumping information. For me, we
never realized that's where it came from. And your
mother turned that information over? We turned
that over to a man that was the head of the Red Cross
in Nice. We didn't know his name, but we knew he was a
Red Cross man. That's all. And he was a Frenchman?
Oh, yeah. OK. What were some of the special codes
that help you to identify other people in the
resistance? Did you know codes that would just, a
general code that would help you know somebody was
in the resistance, or did you just have codes that
you worked with in your own little group? No, we
just, we were, in our particular area, we didn't
know no more than six people through a code deal,
and any one of the six knew six more. So we couldn't,
if we get caught, you know, and beat on to it, you
know, to talk, we wouldn't give no more but just six
people's name, code name, which really don't mean
nothing to the German because it was not their real
name. Did you have a code name? Yeah. What was it? I
had two. One was the American. They called me the
American. The other one, Mac. They called you the
American? But for a long time after the war, you
know, all my friends called me Mac. It was not my
name, Louis H., who I had nothing to do. They call me
Mac. They see me in the street, say, hi, Mac, how are
you doing? Okay. That was just one of those names
that just hang on with me. Huh. But the other one,
the American, that was the one in touch with the
beer man. Oh, huh. That's the only way we come in the
UK. Beer man, American, won't talk to you, and that
was it. If I give any other name, he won't see me. If I
say I'm Mac, forget about it. Did you have a special
code that meant certain things, like one sentence
would mean, I have to go do this, or we need to do
this, or get out of here, the Gestapo's coming? Oh
yes, definitely. Could you give me some examples?
Not really. We had code that was given to us through
the beer man, telling us when to get a certain
place, you know, like... if they were going to drop
something from the airplane for us to use for
sabotage purpose, then they had a code name saying
that Robespierre will shave himself six times.
That meant that we were going to look for six
parachutes. They were going to send some stuff for
demolition purpose. Or the last one we had was the
car are going down the cellar. That man, you guys
better hide out because D-Day is coming up.
They're really going to drop it on you. And that was
some of the code name, some of the code word we had.
Do you know where the beer man got his codes? From
the head of that particular area, which I knew
after the war, you know, who she was. It was a lady.
What was her name? Emily Jeté Latouche. She was the
aunt... of the chief of police of the city of Nice in
France, which at that time was about 250,000
people. But you didn't know her name at the time?
Oh, no. Did you know her code name? No. I didn't know
her at that time at all. So if you got any code
changes, they came from the beer man. Right. That
was the head of our group. How did you know that if
that man was going to shave six times, how did you
know what that meant? We listened to that
through... Oh, okay. The beer man knew some of the
code that was given to him 24 hours prior to down on
the radio, shockwave radio. They had a shockwave
radio somewhere. And all those codes, they were
fresh code. And... If they had that twice on the
radio, then the Germans were trying to do the same
thing, trying to come back with the same type of
code, trying to confuse us, but we knew that was not
it, because it was always a new code, and they knew
the code name. And it happened that the German
government radio, you know, and gave some false
signal trying to catch some of the people, but it
didn't work. They never did. How did you know it was
the Germans? Because you use a colonel one time,
that's it. After the rest, dead. And they never
caught on to that fact? Well, they didn't know
what's going on, you know, right then. What
specific jobs did you do? And you can tell me about a
few of the most important things that you did or the
most outstanding. Well, sabotage and then
police. plastic charge on the bridge, you know,
just get the stuff ready for the people who knew
what they were doing. In other words, they give us a
bunch of little bag that had sugar or sand in it. And
we were to crawl over the fence where they had all
those tanks and the German Jeep and the truck
parked. And they had a bunch of German Shepherd
turn loose in the place. Well, we got friendly with
them by giving, throwing them some meat. and then
we used to go to those vehicles and drop those back
in the fuel tank taking the cap off put them back in
the tank you know and then when they start to drive
the vehicle it jammed the engine you know just get
the diesel pump all messed up and they just break
down and then the underground just jump on the top
of them and took care of them so they were just And
then the other part of it was a plastic bomb. You
know, the sticky bomb you put under a bridge to blow
a bridge up. What we did is just stuck the stuff
under there and then let the other guy take care of
the charge and blow up the bridge. So you just made
sure that he had everything he needed to work with.
Yeah, we just stick the thing under, you know, that
big black thing, go over there and stick it under
that part of the bridge. So we just go over there,
you know, and the Germans wouldn't know who it was.
You know, we'd just see kids playing. They didn't
think that we were... doing harm, and we were just
sticking that stuff. And they were dynamite
charged. Of course, we were kids, we didn't know
about it. If we knew, we'd probably put the thing
over there. But that's what we were doing. You
know, they were using us. We didn't know what we
were doing. But you knew it was to win the war. Yeah,
it was to get rid of the bad German. We had some good
German, but it was to get rid of the bad ones. Okay, I
talked about the beer man a few minutes ago, and
what we were doing, we were sending beer to Germany
because they like beer, you know, like I do. And we
used to sell them beer, and then we'd collect an
empty bottle. So we used to go in the room, and when
they were not there, when they were gone, doing
their business, you know, out of town, and then if I
see any weapons, hand grenade, gun, or... We
didn't try to steal machine gun or rifle, but
mainly pistol and hand grenade. Then I used to
collect those and give them to the beer man so we
could use them against the Germans. So that was
lots of time. I used to go downstairs, four flights
from the hotel with about six or seven hand
grenades in my belt and two or three pistols. and
didn't know what I was doing with it, but I would
take it to the bear man and give it to him, and in
turn, he'd give it to the right people, you know, to
use. So that's...
Did you work by yourself, or were there other kids
that worked with you, or was that too dangerous?
No, the bear man didn't want nobody to, nobody else
to be involved with. We were a single unit. If you
get caught, you couldn't give nobody else names.
to the Gestapo, that's all. Were you asked to pick
up small arms when you collected beer bottles? Or
did you kind of do that on your own at first? No, they
didn't ask anything so that if I was caught in
trial, they could say that they asked me to do that.
They said, do whatever you think is the best to do
for your country. So we went ahead and took
everything we could find, except the big thing
that you couldn't hang, hide, you know, like a
rifle. You can put that in your pants, you know,
so... anything that's small enough like hand
grenade pistol so we use it dynamite lots of
dynamite took quite a bit of dynamite did you get
your beer bottle route so that you could steal
things or did it just happen to come along that was
settled by beer man so he just set me up he knew where
i was supposed to go but he didn't tell me that you
know he just said you go there and there and collect
and that's it four or five different hotels So in
other words, he really did kind of set you up for the
job, but you decided whether or not you wanted to
take the arms at that particular time. Well, he
knew what he was doing, and I didn't know any
better, so I just wanted to do the job. All right.
Did you know that D-Day was coming? Yeah, we were
aware of it. Did you know specifically when? Did
they give you a date, or just in a few days, or...?
They give us a... signal that it was going to
happen, no date and no place of whereabouts. But we
knew that when they come up with a word through the
BBC that it was time for us to get ready for it. So you
got all your information through the BBC? That's
correct.
Were there any special actions that you or the
group of people you knew of did to prepare for
D-Day? Yes, at that particular time They say, when
you hear a certain message through the BBC, then
you say, at that time, go ahead and collect all you
can from the Germans. That's handgun, machine
gun, whatever you can, even if it's a big weapon.
And then sabotage everything they have, like
putting those little bags, whatever they had in
it, sand or sugar, into all their tank, truck, and
motorcycle. and just go and dump everything, just
get rid of it, to create a panic with the Germans
among themselves. So we knew that when that
happened, that was it. Do that and then get out of
the way because they'll be mad, they're gonna
shoot everybody inside. So we did. Do you remember
what the message was that you got from the BBC? Do
you remember how it sounded, the words? Yeah, it
was which means that the car will go down to the
cellar. It was time for us to get down there and
hide. We were the cow. Go down there and hide. Okay.
Did you particularly have any special
assignment? You were just trying to pick up all the
arms and stuff. Yeah, we did. The last thing I did is
pick up a German Luger out of the officer's room. It
was a 9mm Luger. And I gave it to the beer man
himself. He came by, you know, and I gave it to him.
And I know that with that Luger, he shot a guy out of a
motorcycle. He just put him out of business. So
that was the end of it. Were you aware of all the
other jobs that the resistance was doing, the
intelligence, the transportation? No, all that
was kept secret. Nobody knew what the other hand
was doing. But did you know kind of in general that
it was happening? We knew that the whole machine
was rolling, but for protection among each other
in case we get caught by the Gestapo. They wouldn't
tell you anything, what one figure was doing to the
other finger, you know. We just, you knew your own
job and that's it. And you had nobody else but six
people that you knew right around you. And each one
of the six knew six other and that's it. And they all
had code names. So we didn't know no name to speak of
it, except recognize a face. Were you aware of the
ongoing arrests and execution of resistance
members? And if so, how did you deal with your own
danger? Well, I was too young to worry about that,
you know. Yeah, we were aware of some of the Germans
catching some of the people my age, stealing guns,
and then put their hand on the board and cut their
hand with an axe. Just chopped the hand right off of
it. And that we had, I had several, not several, I
had a few friends that either where they had their
hand chopped off or they had their feet chopped
off. and just flat cut their feet with an axe.
Goodness. Just as a punishment. Do you know
anybody that worked with the resistance that had
or has psychological problems like recurring
nightmares, nervous breakdown, that type of
thing? I have one friend, just one that I know, I
forgot his name now, but he was, when the Germans
caught him, the Gestapo caught him, they gave him
to a, a kind of a experiment lab where they were
injecting kerosene in his blood and studied the
reaction. And after the war, he was crippled to a
point that he couldn't walk. And he could, but he
was really dragging himself like he had polio. And
he became very ferocious. And at the end of the war,
he knew some of the people that had done that to him.
And he got the hold of what they call a Bok gun, which
is a machine gun. When you pull the trigger, it was
somehow automatic. And he shot a bunch of people
that
crippled him. Some were French that turned him in.
And I remember one scene that I remember. It was
downhill from our place. where he called one of the
French guys that turned him in, and he told him, he
said, and he turned around and just pulled the
trigger and killed him right there with that
machine gun. And you saw it? And I saw that, you
know, and the guy just got killed right there.
Well, he deserved it, really, but that's some of
the things that happened. How old was that guy that
got caught? Well, he was in his 20s. Oh, boy.
Were there any specific Nazi raids in your area,
such as gathering the Jews up or flushing out the
resistance, any major things that happened in
your area? Yeah, we had, my sister had a party for
front of her birthday party, and usually the
Germans didn't like for you to get together, you
know, more than three or four people in one group.
The minimum you could get together was three. And,
but at that time we were such a good people with the
German, they thought we were, you know, sending
them beer and so that they okayed the party. But we
needed, they needed at that time a record player to
play music. So they weren't even borrowing that
from the German. And the German caught that, that
friend of my sister, you know, and then, and those
are the airplanes coming on top here. an American
airplane bombing France. They caught him and
asked him to strip down and expose himself. They
decided, well, either he's a Jew or he looks like a
Jew. So after quite a bit of talking, they decided,
well, he belonged to the Truart, so he's a good guy.
They turned him loose. But he was an American Jew.
He escaped real close. Were you ever questioned by
the Nazis or the Gestapo? Yeah. One time as a kid I
was playing a soldier and it was an American
soldier and my friend was a German soldier. And I
turned around and shot him. And boy, the Gestapo
gave me hell for that. They took me in their house
and put me in the dark room, and they said they were
going to beat me and all that, but they were just
scaring me, you know. But I really felt strange,
you know, at that time. I bet. I was just a kid, you
know, playing, and I was a good old American
soldier, you know, shot a German, you know.
Somebody had to be the American, end up to be the
one, you know. But that's about as close as I got to
the Gestapo that I wanted to be close to it. Did you
think they really were going to beat you? Well, I
thought they were serious about their business,
you know, but they were just trying to scare me as a
kid. Yeah. Were you ever questioned by the French
police? No. I was too young for that. How did you
feel about the French police, who seemed a lot of
the time to help the Nazis locate members of the
resistance? They seemed a lot of times to be...
More for the Germans than for the French. We had,
just thinking about that now, I remember
something that a friend of mine, well he was not a
friend of mine, he was a school guy, he was about
four years ahead of me, he was about 18, I was 14, and
he was in one of those dime stores in France. And I
walk into that store, and I knew there was an
underground guy that was being suspected by the
Gestapo. So I went over there to warn him and say,
hey, look out, you got the, we call them the cousin
German, you know, the German uncle, I mean cousin.
They asked you, get your butt out of here. And that
guy that I knew it, There was a French guy, and he had
a gun on him, and he was working for the Gestapo. He
was a traitor. And I went to him, you know, and I
said, oh, how are you doing? He said, well, I'm on
surveillance right now. I'm watching that guy
over there. And that was the guy that I just told him
to get out of there. So I told him, I said, well, come
on, let's go have a soda pop, you know, and we had ice
cream. And by that time, the other guy left. And at
the end of the war, that guy got shot, that
collaborator. We used to call him that... Not
through me, but somebody else had told me they just
wanted to shot him. No trial. Do you know other
people that collaborated with the Germans? Oh
yeah, our neighbor. What did they do? They gave it
to one of the mothers and a sister. They had a
friend, he was a Jew. They put him on the train, sent
him to Lyon so he can go to Switzerland. And they
called the Gestapo. At that time, you could get 500
francs for every people that you turn in for
reward. And they did so, you know, and they went
ahead and turned him in. He got arrested in Leon.
And those people, they were colored white there,
but they died before the end of the war anyway, so we
didn't have to shoot them. They died of? Old age.
You know, they just, about two years later, they
were... But they were on the list of the bad people.
They were our next door neighbor. Oh, wonderful.
Were any members of your family ever question your
sister or your mother that you know of? No, not
really. No, they trust us too much. We would play
our game right. Just that one time that your sister
went to borrow the record player? Right. And then
the time I played the American soldier.
About what percentage of the population in your
area do you think were members of the resistance?
Well, we were kept in a blind spot, you know. All we
knew, like I say, is six people in our area. We
called the six men, that was it. But I would say that
probably 30 or 40 percent of the population was
involved. And the rest of it, they were too old to be
involved in it. The younger ones, they were on the
underground in Germany. Do you remember the names
of the six people that you worked with? Yeah. One
was an Armenian, and his name was Andrei
Pekmezian. That's his real name? That was his real
name, yeah. What was his code name? Do you
remember? Oh, no, I don't. No? And then the other
one was... Oh, the other one was me. That's two. And
then the other one... We used to call him Hotel
Riviera because he was the, his daddy was in charge
of a big 200 room hotel next door to us. And I don't
really remember his name. That's way over 40 years
ago, but it's hopefully hard, you know, just two or
three guys and that's it. Do you know what happened
to any of them? Yeah, the only one that I know about
is Andre Pecmesian. He's on a gold resale business
around the world. He sells gold. He buys and sells
gold. He's Armenian. And he used to live in France,
and that's what he's doing. The other one's still
in a business hotel. He manage hotel, big hotel.
The same hotel? Probably. That hotel that I'm
talking about, that Andre Pykmyshyn, not Andre
Pykmyshyn but the other guy managed, that used to
be the dump for the, what we call dump is where they
put all the ammunition for the Germans. They had
bombs and rockets and dynamite and hand grenades
and And the ammo, just plain old rifle ammo, it was
stacked up a mile high. They dug a big hole in the
ground and buried all that and then stuck it by the
ground. And then at the end of the war, they
realized they couldn't carry that with them, so
they blew the whole thing up. And you talk about a
big hole in that place. I bet. They just blew the
whole thing and blew the roof out of our house and
blew the roof of Henry Peck Maison's place out.
That's where we hide at the end of the war, in his
house. And that was quite an explosion. They blew
it up, or the Americans blew it up? They did. No, the
Germans did. They knew they couldn't carry it, so
they went ahead and sabotaged themselves. This
was the Diamond D-Day? That was the same day that
the Americans were landing in the central page in
southern France. Did anything else happen in your
city for the D-Day? Yeah. The French people got
overexcited. They didn't realize that the
Americans were supposed to go towards Marseille,
which is the opposite direction of Nice. So they
went ahead and liberated themselves. Like we did,
all that gun and rifle and hand grenade they stole
from the Germans, got in the street and started to
shoot the Germans, so the Germans took off. They
were overrun by 200,000 against maybe 10,000
Germans, so they took off. But what we didn't
realize is that they had that big armored train
that was on track. They had a big cannon, and they
had ammunition and everything on the train, and
they took that on the hill above the town. And we
were afraid that they were going to start to shoot
the town, all the pieces. So some of the
underground got in touch with the American that
landed in St. Lopez and told them, hey, we are free
now, but the Germans are coming back to free us. So
they sent a colonel of GI to Nice to help us. And they
were showing off, you know. When the Americans
showed up, then the Germans really took off. Even
though there was just a handful of it, it was just,
it demoralized them to see the Americans were
there. And if the Americans had to fight, they
couldn't have fought because they were moving too
fast. The tank and truck and all that, when they're
moving, the jeep, they were traveling 60 miles an
hour. Then the rest of the convoy didn't have a
chance to catch up with it, but it played a real
good... deal on the German's mind, you know,
saying, oh, well, you got the Americans, just keep
it up, you know, forget about it. What were the
German people like? What were the German soldiers
like? Oh, we had some real, real good guys. We had
two men that I really remember real well. They were
real good guys, and one still is, well, I guess he's
died of old age by now, but one was, his name was
Ludwig Gioff. And the other one was Carl Berger.
And Carl got killed by the French communists,
which were not part of our group. They were another
group that we didn't like, but they had done their
own damage to France. But Ludwigs Guiaf, we had him
in our hotel at the end of the war, where we already
had some American pilots that were hiding. They
were shot down, you know, so we told them, hey, just
stay there, you know, this is the end of it. Pretty
soon the G.I. will be over and you'll join your
rank. So when that officer came down the basement
and saw those Americans, and he put his gun down and
said, what the heck's going on here? And we told
him, we said, well, we had those... American pilot
for quite a while here, and we just couldn't,
things were getting tighter, we couldn't turn
them back to Spain, you know, and back to England,
so we kept them over here. So he just laughed, he
said, well, I guess I'm your prisoner now. So, but
he was a real, real nice guy, and right now, well, at
the end of the war, back in 1952, I was in Germany,
and he had a restaurant over there in Saarbrück,
and I met him over there again, and I had quite a
welcome. He got me so drunk, I don't even know what
the hell happened that day, but he really was
pleased, you know, that what we did to him as a
German officer, to the American, you know, save
him from being shot. And he was a real nice guy.
During the whole first phase of the war, they give
us food and provide us with things that we needed.
The Germans themselves, they were not bad. The
ones who were bad were the Prussians, what they
called the Gestapo, the Wehrmacht, the SS. Those
guys, they were terrible. They'd shoot their own
mother, their own sister. They didn't care. But
the Germans themselves, they were good people. I
had no trouble with them at all. They helped us
quite a bit. They helped me quite a bit. How? They
fed me. That's for sure. They gave me food. They
split the ration, and they said, don't eat too,
because if I said that I give you some of my food,
they'll cut my food out, and then that's it, you
know? So I kept my mouth shut, just chewing on it.
You just mentioned something about taking the
American pilots to Spain. Do you know anything
about the transportation routes of the Jews or the
American pilots that got shot down? Yeah, my
mother was in charge of that. At that time, I didn't
know what she was doing after the war. I realized
what she did. And what she did was she disguised
those American pilot and copilot and gunner and
whatever it was on the plane, give them women's
clothes. And then when the man from the Red Cross
came with his van, panel truck, they load all those
women aboard the truck and take them to Spain. And
then from Spain, they would get on a submarine and
go to England. And two of the people that she sent
through there, one was a major. I don't remember
their name. One was a captain, one was a major.
They're the one who gave our name to the American
the government, and in turn, they called my mother
in Paris and give her a medal, and then they called
me and give me a medal, and of course, I didn't care
much about a medal, you know, but we got the medal
anyway, and they told us anytime I want to come in
this country, but we had the door wide open. And did
you, when you came here? Well, I couldn't speak a
word of English, and I didn't care to come over
here, but I came here on vacation, and I'm still
here, and that's what my boss says, still on
vacation. You haven't mentioned much about the
plight of the Jews during this time, except for
that one time for your neighbor. Did you know
anything about the gathering up of Jews, the
transportation of Jews to the concentration
camps? Well, not a lot, no, other than the close
friends that I had that were Jews. I knew that some
of them got caught in a... They were put in a boxcar
where they put cattle in it and packed them and sent
them to Germany. But we didn't keep track. We
couldn't keep track at that time. Of course, we had
no communication. But we knew they had it. Once
they got on those trains, that was it. Yeah. Was
there any specific place in your area where the
Nazis took the Jews before they boarded the trains
to go off? Yeah, they had a house about a couple
blocks down from our place. They called it Villa de
Nobilis. And that was a center where they question
and interrogate the suspect on the underground,
all Jews, to get more Jews' names or more
underground names. And they had the SS and the
Gestapo right there to do the interrogation. And
that house was known to be a torture house where
they put you in the basement. They had a post in the
center of the room, and they'd strip all your
clothes and make you walk around and around that
post during the winter when it was real, real cold,
and then trying to make you talk, and if you
collapsed or fell down, they'd get a bucket of
water and they'd just throw it at you and wake you
up, you know, and knock you with a battle rifle, and
you'd go again around the post until you'd talk or
you'd die. And they had on that house, after the
war, I remember now, a place, they had a bathroom
where they used to submerge people, submerge
their head in the bathtub full of water and then
wait that you suffocated. And then when you start
to turn blue, I guess, you know, they pull out the
water, give you artificial respiration, try to
bring you up and then make you talk again. And then
telling you that you were dying. And that was some
of the good things that they were doing to you. And
the other The only other thing that I remember is
what they call the lead room. It was a room that was
fully, the walls were covered with lead, and they
keep you in that room, and as you know, I don't know
what it does to people, but they say it reacts to
their physical, you know, they just... Turned
insane, you know, because there was no way out.
There was no air coming in, no nothing. It was
sealed completely. That was the only type of
insulation they had, solid lead. So they just keep
them in the room and keep those either Jew or
underground guy, seal them in that room, you know,
and then just wait, you know, peek through
windows. They had double window deal and see when
the guy collapsed, you know, go in there and bring
him back to life, make him talk and then turn him
back into the room. So those were the few places
that they tortured people in that Villa de
Nobilis. What does that name mean? It's just a name
like Joe Brown or Frank Smith. It was a name, an
Italian architect that designed the house. Way
before the war, he had nothing to do with what
happened to it. Did you know anybody personally
who were tortured in some of these rooms, or did you
just hear stories or somebody that knew somebody?
No, we had a... The head of the underground in our
particular area, her name was, I guess I said that
before, Emilie Jete Latouche. She was the aunt of
that chief of police in Lyon. I mean, chief of
police in Nice. And she was in that house. Did I
mention that on the tape before? Well, she was
tortured, you know, and then the Gestapo came over
and picked her up. Okay, well, that's one of the
people that I knew that went through that
particular place right there. And then there was
another French Jew woman who went through there,
but somehow she got free through some... German
mistake. They turned her loose, you know, thought
they had the wrong woman. And they had the right
one. There's a bookkeeper mistake right there.
And Bo, she disappeared too. I mean, they couldn't
find her after that. She got out of there and she
just escaped. And that's about it. Okay, on that
Villa de Nobilis I was talking about a few minutes
ago. That lady that we learned later on was the head
of our underground, was of course Emilie Jete
Latouche, and she was caught by the Gestapo. They
took her into that villa and then just go in and
torture her, beat her up to death, you know, and
just left her almost dead, you know. And finally
the German Wehrmacht and the Gestapo came over to
pick her up, take her to a correctional center
where they would really start to cut on her finger
and cut on her toe and then just cut the piece, you
know, to make her talk. They came over to pick her
up. So the German people in that villa turned loose
to that Gestapo and the Wehrmacht And the officer
in charge of that particular group, there were
five guys, just went ahead and knocked the heck out
of her, you know, just put her on the ground and say,
you think you had hell over here, you just wait
until we give you our treatment. We're going to
start to cut your finger one at a time, you throw one
at a time, you burst one at a time, you're going to
talk. And they loaded her in the car and then took
off. And that was the end of it because all those
guys that were from the underground, they just
free her up. And the Germans were really upset
about that, but the Germans that were supposed to
come over and pick her up, they were all killed and
bushed by those people. So she was freed, and after
the war, and of course she came through that, you
know, and her nephew was the appointed chief of
police for the city of Nice, and I knew him pretty
well myself. young friend of mine in school that
was his nephew. So it was kind of like a family deal.
Are there any other people that you know worked in
the resistance and are now important people or
still in the area there? Okay, when we were in San
Diego, we met, excuse me, We had a, we met a friend in
San Diego in California that was from France. And
he was in the underground in the Pyrenees. His name
was Maurice Richoux. And the Gestapo caught him.
And to make him talk, they hang him by the foot. And
then when the blood come to his head, you know, when
it got real red, purple, you know, they just went
ahead and beat him up in the head, you know, trying
to make him talk. And he's, well, at that time he was
in San Diego. He was a tailor making a suit, a real
good French tailor. Did he have any problems from
the beatings and stuff that he received that you
could see? Well, really he didn't have no
problems. the physical problem that you could see
except that he was kind of a slow to react on
question that you ask him. His wife used to get mad
at him, you know, and you ask him a question and it
take him a while, you know, to go ahead and register
and then give you an answer. But that was due to the
beating that he got, you know, and it just affect
his brain, you know, just being hang upside down
and went through all the blood get to your head and
you get beat onto it. I'm pretty sure done some
damage to his way of thinking after that. Did you
have any personal memories or problems that came
about as a result of the war and your activities in
the resistance? Well, after the war, when
everything was over with it, the American Free
France, for many, many years after that, at night
if I could, if I hear airplane flying, it used to
scare me. because I used to remember that all the
flight that the British and American Air Force
were doing over France was at night so they don't
get shot. So anytime I heard, anytime I could hear
an airplane flying at night, it just scared me to
death, you know. And for a long, long time after I
came in this country, night flight was just a
nightmare for me. I just stayed in the bed and
listened to it and was waiting for the bomb. And
that's about it. OK, something else I remember. I
remember when we were fleeing from the German.
They came through France. We left Chaussin, which
is in Jura. We went through Lyon and southern
France. And we end up in the Pyrenees. We had on the
road, we were driving. And you could see cars on
each side of the road. They were shot down by
airplane, by German airplane. And in our car, my
mother was there, my sister, and Mr. Jean there,
the friend of my mother and her daughter and
myself. And my mother had a little briefcase
handcuffed to her hand where they were carrying
all their gold. It was full of gold. We were taking
that to Southern France. And in the trunk, we had
everything we could salvage from the place, you
know, that Mr. Jean did salvage, which was, it was
champagne. So we had champagne in the trunk, we had
gasoline can in the car, and we had gold in the front
seat. And every time we could hear one of those
planes coming above us, you know, he pulled under a
big, tall tree, a poplar tree, you know, which are
pretty tall, and you could hear the machine gun or
the airplane trying to shoot us, you know, and we
just wait there until he got tired of flying or run
out of fuel, you know, and take off, and then we keep
on going. One thing that I remember, we used to, not
we, but my mother and Mr. Jean, they used to trade
some of the champagne for food and other need that
we needed, like milk for us. And we stopped into a
small town and it was a dairy. We stopped at a dairy,
you know, and they needed some milk for us. We asked
the guy, they asked the guy, they says, hey, do you
have some milk for the kid? And he said, no, we don't
have any milk anymore. We just milked the cow about
two hours ago and the milk is gone. And he said,
well, I got a bottle of champagne. You'd like to
trade that for a bottle of milk? He said, hell yeah,
we got the milk. So he went over there and traded the
milk for the champagne. Do you feel that your
personal contributions to the resistance were
worth the danger? Yeah, I felt that what I've done,
you know, helped. some or matter of fact helped
quite a bit on our particular area that particular
part of town in nice where we were involved with the
german and especially with the munition people
where they were taking the ammunition to italy and
i felt a little bit i did you know help to free france
just very little bit but every little bit count
that's true well thank you very much for this
interview